README.md, before:

# goquent ORM
[![Docs](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-API-blue.svg)](https://faciam-dev.github.io/goquent/)

This package provides a minimal ORM built on top of [goquent-query-builder](https://github.com/faciam-dev/goquent-query-builder).
It supports MySQL and PostgreSQL.

## Usage
```go
import (
       "context"
       "github.com/faciam-dev/goquent/orm"
       "github.com/faciam-dev/goquent/orm/conv"
       "log"
)

db, _ := orm.OpenWithDriver(orm.MySQL, "root:password@tcp(localhost:3306)/testdb?parseTime=true")
// PostgreSQL example
// db, _ := orm.OpenWithDriver(orm.Postgres, "postgres://user:pass@localhost/testdb?sslmode=disable")
ctx := context.Background()
u, _ := orm.SelectOne[User](ctx, db, "SELECT * FROM users WHERE id = ?", 1)
rows, _ := orm.SelectAll[map[string]any](ctx, db, "SELECT * FROM users")

_, _ = orm.Insert(ctx, db, User{Name: "sam", Age: 18})
_, _ = orm.Update(ctx, db, User{ID: 1, Name: "Alice"}, orm.Columns("name"), orm.WherePK())
_, _ = orm.Update(ctx, db, map[string]any{"id": 1, "name": "Bob"}, orm.Table("users"), orm.PK("id"), orm.WherePK())
user := new(User)
err := db.Model(user).Where("id", 1).First(user)

var row map[string]any
err = db.Table("users").Where("id", 1).FirstMap(&row)

// fetch a typed value from a map
id, err := conv.Value[uint64](row, "id")
if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}

var rows []map[string]any
err = db.Table("users").Where("age", ">", 20).GetMaps(&rows)

var users []User
err = db.Model(&User{}).Where("age", ">", 20).Get(&users)

// insert a record using a struct and get its auto-increment id
newID, err := db.Table("users").InsertGetId(User{Name: "sam", Age: 18})
if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}
// zero-value fields are inserted unless tagged with `omitempty`

// specify a custom primary key column when needed
altID, err := db.Table("accounts").PrimaryKey("account_id").InsertGetId(map[string]any{"name": "jane"})
if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}
```

Transactions are handled via `Transaction`:
```go
err := db.Transaction(func(tx orm.Tx) error {
    return tx.Table("users").Where("id", 1).First(&user)
})
```

Context-aware transactions are also available:
```go
ctx := context.Background()
err := db.TransactionContext(ctx, func(tx orm.Tx) error {
    return tx.Table("users").Where("id", 1).First(&user)
})
```

Manual transaction control is also available:
```go
ctx := context.Background()
tx, err := db.BeginTx(ctx, nil)
if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}
if _, err = tx.Table("users").Insert(User{Name: "sam"}); err != nil {
    tx.Rollback()
    log.Fatal(err)
}
if err = tx.Commit(); err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}
```

### Column comparisons
Values passed to `Where` are always treated as literals. To compare one column
against another, use `WhereColumn`:

```go
err := db.Table("profiles").
    WhereColumn("profiles.user_id", "users.id").
    Where("profiles.bio", "=", "go developer").
    FirstMap(&row)
```

## Project Structure
The repository follows the Onion Architecture:

```
./cmd/        - Entry points
./internal/   - Application code
  ├── domain        - Business logic
  ├── usecase       - Application workflows
  ├── infrastructure - External implementations
  └── interface     - HTTP handlers or adapters
```

The `orm` directory contains the lightweight ORM used by the project.

## Development
1. Start MySQL 8 using Docker Compose:
   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d
   ```
2. Run tests:
   ```bash
   go test ./...
   ```
The tests automatically create the required tables.


## Benchmarks
Run benchmarks with `go test -bench . ./tests`.
Results on a GitHub Codespace (Go 1.23) show ~1.5x speedup over GORM for scanning operations.

## PostgreSQL Support
The driver now includes a `PostgresDialect`. Use `orm.OpenWithDriver(orm.Postgres, dsn)` with a valid PostgreSQL DSN to connect.

### Custom Drivers
Register a driver and optionally its SQL dialect so the ORM can infer quoting rules:

```go
orm.RegisterDriverWithDialect("mysql-custom", &mysql.MySQLDriver{}, driver.MySQLDialect{})
db, err := orm.OpenWithDriver("mysql-custom", dsn)
```

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

feat: add flexible boolean scanning

README.md, after:

# goquent ORM
[![Docs](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-API-blue.svg)](https://faciam-dev.github.io/goquent/)

This package provides a minimal ORM built on top of [goquent-query-builder](https://github.com/faciam-dev/goquent-query-builder).
It supports MySQL and PostgreSQL.

## Usage
```go
import (
       "context"
       "github.com/faciam-dev/goquent/orm"
       "github.com/faciam-dev/goquent/orm/conv"
       "log"
)

db, _ := orm.OpenWithDriver(orm.MySQL, "root:password@tcp(localhost:3306)/testdb?parseTime=true")
// PostgreSQL example
// db, _ := orm.OpenWithDriver(orm.Postgres, "postgres://user:pass@localhost/testdb?sslmode=disable")
ctx := context.Background()
u, _ := orm.SelectOne[User](ctx, db, "SELECT * FROM users WHERE id = ?", 1)
rows, _ := orm.SelectAll[map[string]any](ctx, db, "SELECT * FROM users")

_, _ = orm.Insert(ctx, db, User{Name: "sam", Age: 18})
_, _ = orm.Update(ctx, db, User{ID: 1, Name: "Alice"}, orm.Columns("name"), orm.WherePK())
_, _ = orm.Update(ctx, db, map[string]any{"id": 1, "name": "Bob"}, orm.Table("users"), orm.PK("id"), orm.WherePK())
user := new(User)
err := db.Model(user).Where("id", 1).First(user)

var row map[string]any
err = db.Table("users").Where("id", 1).FirstMap(&row)

// fetch a typed value from a map
id, err := conv.Value[uint64](row, "id")
if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}

var rows []map[string]any
err = db.Table("users").Where("age", ">", 20).GetMaps(&rows)

var users []User
err = db.Model(&User{}).Where("age", ">", 20).Get(&users)

// insert a record using a struct and get its auto-increment id
newID, err := db.Table("users").InsertGetId(User{Name: "sam", Age: 18})
if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}
// zero-value fields are inserted unless tagged with `omitempty`

// specify a custom primary key column when needed
altID, err := db.Table("accounts").PrimaryKey("account_id").InsertGetId(map[string]any{"name": "jane"})
if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}
```

### Boolean dialect compatibility

goquent absorbs differences between MySQL's `TINYINT(1)` and PostgreSQL's `BOOLEAN`.
The default `BoolCompat` policy accepts `0/1`, `t/f`, and `true/false` when scanning into
`bool`, `sql.NullBool`, or `*bool` fields. The policy can be changed globally or per field:

```go
db, _ := orm.OpenWithDriverOptions(orm.MySQL, dsn, orm.WithBoolScanPolicy(orm.BoolStrict))

type row struct {
    Nullable bool         `db:"nullable,boolstrict"`
    Flag     sql.NullBool `db:"flag,boollenient"`
}
```

Use `BoolStrict` to only allow `bool` and `0/1` values. `BoolLenient` additionally accepts
any non-zero number and strings like `"yes"`, `"on"`, or `"off"`.

Transactions are handled via `Transaction`:
```go
err := db.Transaction(func(tx orm.Tx) error {
    return tx.Table("users").Where("id", 1).First(&user)
})
```

Context-aware transactions are also available:
```go
ctx := context.Background()
err := db.TransactionContext(ctx, func(tx orm.Tx) error {
    return tx.Table("users").Where("id", 1).First(&user)
})
```

Manual transaction control is also available:
```go
ctx := context.Background()
tx, err := db.BeginTx(ctx, nil)
if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}
if _, err = tx.Table("users").Insert(User{Name: "sam"}); err != nil {
    tx.Rollback()
    log.Fatal(err)
}
if err = tx.Commit(); err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}
```

### Column comparisons
Values passed to `Where` are always treated as literals. To compare one column
against another, use `WhereColumn`:

```go
err := db.Table("profiles").
    WhereColumn("profiles.user_id", "users.id").
    Where("profiles.bio", "=", "go developer").
    FirstMap(&row)
```

## Project Structure
The repository follows the Onion Architecture:

```
./cmd/        - Entry points
./internal/   - Application code
  ├── domain        - Business logic
  ├── usecase       - Application workflows
  ├── infrastructure - External implementations
  └── interface     - HTTP handlers or adapters
```

The `orm` directory contains the lightweight ORM used by the project.

## Development
1. Start MySQL 8 using Docker Compose:
   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d
   ```
2. Run tests:
   ```bash
   go test ./...
   ```
The tests automatically create the required tables.


## Benchmarks
Run benchmarks with `go test -bench . ./tests`.
Results on a GitHub Codespace (Go 1.23) show ~1.5x speedup over GORM for scanning operations.

## PostgreSQL Support
The driver now includes a `PostgresDialect`. Use `orm.OpenWithDriver(orm.Postgres, dsn)` with a valid PostgreSQL DSN to connect.

### Custom Drivers
Register a driver and optionally its SQL dialect so the ORM can infer quoting rules:

```go
orm.RegisterDriverWithDialect("mysql-custom", &mysql.MySQLDriver{}, driver.MySQLDialect{})
db, err := orm.OpenWithDriver("mysql-custom", dsn)
```

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
